readme.md, before:

# `cai` - The fastest CLI tool for prompting LLMs

## Features

- Build with Rust 🦀 for supreme performance and speed! 🏎️
- High level commands like `cai ocr` for better usability. 💡
- Support for models by
  - [Anthropic]
  - [OpenAI]
  - [Google]
  - [Groq]
  - [Cerebras]
  - [Deepseek]
  - [xAI]
  - Local LLMs via [Ollama] and [Llamafile]
- Prompt several models at once. 🤼
    ![Demo of cai's all command](screenshots/2024-04-13t1627_all.png)
- Syntax highlighting for better readability of code snippets. 🌈

[Anthropic]: https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/about-claude/models/all-models
[Cerebras]: https://inference-docs.cerebras.ai/introduction
[Deepseek]: https://api-docs.deepseek.com/quick_start/pricing
[Google]: https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models
[Groq]: https://console.groq.com/docs/models
[Llamafile]: https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile
[Ollama]: https://ollama.com
[OpenAI]: https://platform.openai.com/docs/models
[xAI]: https://x.ai/api#pricing


## Demo

![`cai` demo](./demos/main.gif)


## Installation

```sh
cargo install cai
```


## Usage

Before using Cai, an API key must be set up.
Simply execute `cai` in your terminal and follow the instructions.

Cai supports the following APIs:

- **Groq** - [Create new API key](https://console.groq.com/keys).
- **OpenAI** - [Create new API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys).
- **Anthropic** -
    [Create new API key](https://console.anthropic.com/settings/keys).
- **Llamafile** - Local [Llamafile] server running at http://localhost:8080.
- **Ollama** - Local [Ollama] server running at http://localhost:11434.

Afterwards, you can use `cai` to run prompts directly from the terminal:

```sh
cai List 10 fast CLI tools
```

Or a specific model, like Anthropic's Claude Opus:

```sh
cai op List 10 fast CLI tools
```

Full help output:

```txt
$ cai help
Cai 0.11.0

The fastest CLI tool for prompting LLMs

Usage: cai [OPTIONS] [PROMPT]... [COMMAND]

Commands:
  fast        Shortcut for `groq openai/gpt-oss-20b`
  local       Shortcut for 'ollama llama3.2'
  value       Return only the value/answer without explanation for the provided question
  svg         Generate an SVG graphic from a textual description
  ocr         Extract text from an image
  rename      Analyze and rename files to timestamp plus description
  changelog   Generate a changelog starting from a given commit using OpenAI's GPT-4o
  reply       Reply to a conversation passed via stdin. Add additional reply instructions as the prompt
  rewrite     Fix spelling, grammar, and wording issues in text passed via stdin
  transcribe  Transcribe an audio file
  image       Generate an image using GPT-5 image generation
  google      Google [aliases: go]
  ge          - Gemini Pro shortcut
  gf          - Gemini Flash shortcut
  groq        Groq [aliases: gr]
  ll          - Llama 3 shortcut (🏆 Default)
  mi          - Mixtral shortcut
  cerebras    Cerebras [aliases: ce]
  deepseek    DeepSeek [aliases: de]
  openai      OpenAI [aliases: op]
  gp          - GPT-4o shortcut
  gm          - GPT-4o mini shortcut
  o3          - o3 shortcut
  o4m         - o4-mini shortcut
  gpt41       - gpt-4.1 shortcut
  gpt41m      - gpt-4.1-mini shortcut
  gpt41n      - gpt-4.1-nano shortcut
  gpt5        - gpt-5 shortcut
  gpt5m       - gpt-5-mini shortcut
  gpt5n       - gpt-5-nano shortcut
  o1p         - o1-pro shortcut
  anthropic   Anthropic [aliases: an]
  cl          - Claude Opus
  so          - Claude Sonnet
  ha          - Claude Haiku
  xai         xAI
  grok        - Grok
  llamafile   Llamafile server hosted at http://localhost:8080 [aliases: lf]
  ollama      Ollama server hosted at http://localhost:11434 [aliases: ol]
  all         Simultaneously send prompt to each provider's default model:
              - Groq Llama 3.1
              - Antropic Claude Sonnet 3.7
              - Google Gemini 2.0 Flash
              - OpenAI GPT-4o mini
              - Ollama Llama 3
              - Llamafile
  bash        Use Bash development as the prompt context
  c           Use C development as the prompt context
  cpp         Use C++ development as the prompt context
  cs          Use C# development as the prompt context
  docker      Use Docker development as the prompt context
  elm         Use Elm development as the prompt context
  fish        Use Fish development as the prompt context
  fs          Use F# development as the prompt context
  gd          Use Godot and GDScript development as the prompt context
  git         Use Git development as the prompt context
  gl          Use Gleam development as the prompt context
  golang      Use Go development as the prompt context
  hs          Use Haskell development as the prompt context
  java        Use Java development as the prompt context
  js          Use JavaScript development as the prompt context
  kt          Use Kotlin development as the prompt context
  ly          Use LilyPond development as the prompt context
  lua         Use Lua development as the prompt context
  nix         Use Nix development as the prompt context
  oc          Use OCaml development as the prompt context
  php         Use PHP development as the prompt context
  pg          Use Postgres development as the prompt context
  ps          Use PureScript development as the prompt context
  py          Use Python development as the prompt context
  rb          Use Ruby development as the prompt context
  rs          Use Rust development as the prompt context
  sql         Use SQLite development as the prompt context
  sw          Use Swift development as the prompt context
  ts          Use TypeScript development as the prompt context
  ty          Use Typst development as the prompt context
  wl          Use Wolfram Language and Mathematica development as the prompt context
  zig         Use Zig development as the prompt context
  jq          Use jq development as the prompt context
  help        Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)

Arguments:
  [PROMPT]...  The prompt to send to the AI model

Options:
  -r, --raw                        Print raw response without any metadata
  -j, --json                       Prompt LLM in JSON output mode
      --json-schema <JSON_SCHEMA>  JSON schema to validate the output against
  -h, --help                       Print help


Examples:
  # Send a prompt to the default model
  cai Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Send a prompt to each provider's default model
  cai all Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Send a prompt to Anthropic's Claude Opus
  cai anthropic claude-opus Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai an claude-opus Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai cl Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai anthropic claude-3-opus-latest Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Send a prompt to locally running Ollama server
  cai ollama llama3 Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai ol ll Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Use the `local` shortcut for using Ollama's default model
  cai local Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Add data via stdin
  cat main.rs | cai Explain this code

  # Use a JSON schema to specify the output format
  cai --json-schema='{"properties":{"age":{"type":"number"}},"required":["age"]}' gp Barack Obama
  
```


## Related

- [AI CLI] - Get answers for CLI commands from ChatGPT. (TypeScript)
- [AIChat] - All-in-one chat and copilot CLI for 10+ AI platforms. (Rust)
- [clai] - Command line artificial intelligence as a local LLM multi-tool (Go)
- [Ell] - CLI tool for LLMs written in Bash.
- [Goose] - Local AI agent.
- [ja] - CLI / TUI app to work with AI tools. (Rust)
- [llm] - Access large language models from the command-line. (Python)
- [smartcat] - Integrate LLMs in the Unix command ecosystem. (Rust)
- [tgpt] - AI chatbots for the terminal without needing API keys. (Go)

[AI CLI]: https://github.com/abhagsain/ai-cli
[AIChat]: https://github.com/sigoden/aichat
[clai]: https://github.com/baalimago/clai
[Ell]: https://github.com/simonmysun/ell
[Goose]: https://block.github.io/goose/
[ja]: https://github.com/joshka/ja
[llm]: https://github.com/simonw/llm
[smartcat]: https://github.com/efugier/smartcat
[tgpt]: https://github.com/aandrew-me/tgpt

Commit message:

Add header image with short usage examples

readme.md, after:

# `cai` - User friendly CLI tool for AI tasks

![Demo usage of cai in a terminal](demos/2025-08-15t2052.png)


## Features

- High level commands for great usability
  - `cai value capital of Australia`
  - `cai image photo of a banana`
  - `cai ocr page.png`
  - `pbpaste | cai rewrite 'more professional'`
  - Check [usage section](./#usage) for all commands
- Build with Rust 🦀 for supreme performance and speed! 🏎️
- Support for models by
  - [Anthropic]
  - [OpenAI]
  - [Google]
  - [Groq]
  - [Cerebras]
  - [Deepseek]
  - [xAI]
  - Local LLMs via [Ollama] and [Llamafile]
- Prompt several models at once. 🤼
    ![Demo of cai's all command](screenshots/2024-04-13t1627_all.png)
- Syntax highlighting for better readability of code snippets. 🌈

[Anthropic]: https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/about-claude/models/all-models
[Cerebras]: https://inference-docs.cerebras.ai/introduction
[Deepseek]: https://api-docs.deepseek.com/quick_start/pricing
[Google]: https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models
[Groq]: https://console.groq.com/docs/models
[Llamafile]: https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile
[Ollama]: https://ollama.com
[OpenAI]: https://platform.openai.com/docs/models
[xAI]: https://x.ai/api#pricing


## Installation

```sh
cargo install cai
```


## Usage

Before using Cai, an API key must be set up.
Simply execute `cai` in your terminal and follow the instructions.

Cai supports the following APIs:

- **Groq** - [Create new API key](https://console.groq.com/keys).
- **OpenAI** - [Create new API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys).
- **Anthropic** -
    [Create new API key](https://console.anthropic.com/settings/keys).
- **Llamafile** - Local [Llamafile] server running at http://localhost:8080.
- **Ollama** - Local [Ollama] server running at http://localhost:11434.

Afterwards, you can use `cai` to run prompts directly from the terminal:

```sh
cai List 10 fast CLI tools
```

Or a specific model, like Anthropic's Claude Opus:

```sh
cai op List 10 fast CLI tools
```

Full help output:

```txt
$ cai help
Cai 0.11.0

The fastest CLI tool for prompting LLMs

Usage: cai [OPTIONS] [PROMPT]... [COMMAND]

Commands:
  fast        Shortcut for `groq openai/gpt-oss-20b`
  local       Shortcut for 'ollama llama3.2'
  value       Return only the value/answer without explanation for the provided question
  svg         Generate an SVG graphic from a textual description
  ocr         Extract text from an image
  rename      Analyze and rename files to timestamp plus description
  changelog   Generate a changelog starting from a given commit using OpenAI's GPT-4o
  reply       Reply to a conversation passed via stdin. Add additional reply instructions as the prompt
  rewrite     Fix spelling, grammar, and wording issues in text passed via stdin
  transcribe  Transcribe an audio file
  image       Generate an image using GPT-5 image generation
  google      Google [aliases: go]
  ge          - Gemini Pro shortcut
  gf          - Gemini Flash shortcut
  groq        Groq [aliases: gr]
  ll          - Llama 3 shortcut (🏆 Default)
  mi          - Mixtral shortcut
  cerebras    Cerebras [aliases: ce]
  deepseek    DeepSeek [aliases: de]
  openai      OpenAI [aliases: op]
  gp          - GPT-4o shortcut
  gm          - GPT-4o mini shortcut
  o3          - o3 shortcut
  o4m         - o4-mini shortcut
  gpt41       - gpt-4.1 shortcut
  gpt41m      - gpt-4.1-mini shortcut
  gpt41n      - gpt-4.1-nano shortcut
  gpt5        - gpt-5 shortcut
  gpt5m       - gpt-5-mini shortcut
  gpt5n       - gpt-5-nano shortcut
  o1p         - o1-pro shortcut
  anthropic   Anthropic [aliases: an]
  cl          - Claude Opus
  so          - Claude Sonnet
  ha          - Claude Haiku
  xai         xAI
  grok        - Grok
  llamafile   Llamafile server hosted at http://localhost:8080 [aliases: lf]
  ollama      Ollama server hosted at http://localhost:11434 [aliases: ol]
  all         Simultaneously send prompt to each provider's default model:
              - Groq Llama 3.1
              - Antropic Claude Sonnet 3.7
              - Google Gemini 2.0 Flash
              - OpenAI GPT-4o mini
              - Ollama Llama 3
              - Llamafile
  bash        Use Bash development as the prompt context
  c           Use C development as the prompt context
  cpp         Use C++ development as the prompt context
  cs          Use C# development as the prompt context
  docker      Use Docker development as the prompt context
  elm         Use Elm development as the prompt context
  fish        Use Fish development as the prompt context
  fs          Use F# development as the prompt context
  gd          Use Godot and GDScript development as the prompt context
  git         Use Git development as the prompt context
  gl          Use Gleam development as the prompt context
  golang      Use Go development as the prompt context
  hs          Use Haskell development as the prompt context
  java        Use Java development as the prompt context
  js          Use JavaScript development as the prompt context
  kt          Use Kotlin development as the prompt context
  ly          Use LilyPond development as the prompt context
  lua         Use Lua development as the prompt context
  nix         Use Nix development as the prompt context
  oc          Use OCaml development as the prompt context
  php         Use PHP development as the prompt context
  pg          Use Postgres development as the prompt context
  ps          Use PureScript development as the prompt context
  py          Use Python development as the prompt context
  rb          Use Ruby development as the prompt context
  rs          Use Rust development as the prompt context
  sql         Use SQLite development as the prompt context
  sw          Use Swift development as the prompt context
  ts          Use TypeScript development as the prompt context
  ty          Use Typst development as the prompt context
  wl          Use Wolfram Language and Mathematica development as the prompt context
  zig         Use Zig development as the prompt context
  jq          Use jq development as the prompt context
  help        Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)

Arguments:
  [PROMPT]...  The prompt to send to the AI model

Options:
  -r, --raw                        Print raw response without any metadata
  -j, --json                       Prompt LLM in JSON output mode
      --json-schema <JSON_SCHEMA>  JSON schema to validate the output against
  -h, --help                       Print help


Examples:
  # Send a prompt to the default model
  cai Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Send a prompt to each provider's default model
  cai all Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Send a prompt to Anthropic's Claude Opus
  cai anthropic claude-opus Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai an claude-opus Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai cl Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai anthropic claude-3-opus-latest Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Send a prompt to locally running Ollama server
  cai ollama llama3 Which year did the Titanic sink
  cai ol ll Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Use the `local` shortcut for using Ollama's default model
  cai local Which year did the Titanic sink

  # Add data via stdin
  cat main.rs | cai Explain this code

  # Use a JSON schema to specify the output format
  cai --json-schema='{"properties":{"age":{"type":"number"}},"required":["age"]}' gp Barack Obama
  
```


## Related

- [AI CLI] - Get answers for CLI commands from ChatGPT. (TypeScript)
- [AIChat] - All-in-one chat and copilot CLI for 10+ AI platforms. (Rust)
- [clai] - Command line artificial intelligence as a local LLM multi-tool (Go)
- [Ell] - CLI tool for LLMs written in Bash.
- [Goose] - Local AI agent.
- [ja] - CLI / TUI app to work with AI tools. (Rust)
- [llm] - Access large language models from the command-line. (Python)
- [smartcat] - Integrate LLMs in the Unix command ecosystem. (Rust)
- [tgpt] - AI chatbots for the terminal without needing API keys. (Go)

[AI CLI]: https://github.com/abhagsain/ai-cli
[AIChat]: https://github.com/sigoden/aichat
[clai]: https://github.com/baalimago/clai
[Ell]: https://github.com/simonmysun/ell
[Goose]: https://block.github.io/goose/
[ja]: https://github.com/joshka/ja
[llm]: https://github.com/simonw/llm
[smartcat]: https://github.com/efugier/smartcat
[tgpt]: https://github.com/aandrew-me/tgpt
